is outside the supreme court in perth
it's been
a
especially harrowing morning as the
court has heard victim
impact statements read out regarding
those who've been terrorized by the
actions of bradley robert edwards
they include jenny rimmer who's the
mother of 23 year old jane rimmer who
was killed by edwards in 1996
but we've also heard from the two
survivors of a brutal rape
and a separate sexual assault carried
out by edwards in the years before the
clermont killings
from jenny rimmer we heard that the
death of her daughter jane
shattered her entire family she said she
believed that jane would have
gone on to get married and had children
and that she would have made
a wonderful mother she also said that
her husband and jane's father died of
cancer 14 years ago
never knowing what happened to his
daughter we also heard from those two
survivors who identities are suppressed
one of them told the court that edwards
was the villain of her nightmares and
something that she couldn't escape
she said that she falls asleep at night
fearing that someone would attack her
and that she hates being hugged or
touched something she described as
a generational trauma that she has
passed on to her children
from the other victim who was attacked
at caracada cemetery not far from
clermont
she described the gut-wrenching
loneliness that she has felt
in having to relive the most horrifying
night of her life
the court after those impact statements
heard that a psychiatric report had been
ordered into bradley robert edwards and
that a psychiatrist had attended the
prison to interview him
but bradley edwards refused to speak to
the psychiatrist so there is no
psychiatric
report to inform the sentencing by
justice stephen hall today
and so what is expected when justice
stephen hall ultimately hands down his
sentence
well because of the nature of these
crimes these two murders and the other
sexual assaults
bradley robert edwards will receive a
mandatory life sentence the main
question today is whether he will ever
be
allowed to be considered for release or
be able to apply for parole
the only other time that a a crime has
attracted an order of having an order
that
that a a prisoner never be released was
only handed down last year which was
for anthony robert harvey who killed
five members of his own family
that order was delivered by justice
stephen hall himself
we have heard so far submissions from
the prosecution arguing
that this was these crimes were so
severe so rare and so heinous
that there was no other appropriate
option other than
for the judge to deliver that order for
um uh
bradley robert edwards never to be
released so those submissions from the
prosecution are ongoing we will also
hear from defence counsel
before we hear the ultimate decision by
justice stephen hall in terms of that
sentence today
hundreds of bikies have hit the streets
of perth today to attend the funeral of
former rebels boss nick martin
mr martin was fatally shot at perth
motorplex earlier this month
reporter jessica warrener is outside the
pinaroo cemetery in perth
what's the scene like there today
well gemma we're starting to see
hundreds of people arrive for the
funeral
of the former rebels boss nick martin
here at pinaroo cemetery north of perth
the procession started out at north
perth in a funeral home
has taken its way up the west coast
highway and now is arriving here we're
still seeing traffic choke the streets
even though most of the mourners have
made their way inside
as you mentioned before mr martin was
fatally shot at the perth motorplex in
quinana a couple of weeks ago
in front of hundreds of onlookers and
jessica who's in attendance
in attendance today we've got mr
martin's family and friends
and hundreds of rebel bikees
the police were advising that they were
expecting people to travel from
interstate as well
apart from new south wales but police
have been quite firm in saying that no
matter how many bikes we get here today
police will be outnumbering them and the
community should feel safe
and as for the investigation has nick
martin's shooter
been found nick martin's shooter
is still at large and the state
government has actually put forward a 1
million
reward for anyone who can come forward
with information about what might have
happened to him
the word is that police suspect a sniper
attack
but we have no further information as to
who that person is yet
reporter jessica warrener in perth thank
you
australia's high commission in the uk
says it's working to find
alternative arrangements for australians
affected by new international airport
restrictions
singapore and hong kong have announced
transit restrictions on travellers from
the united kingdom
in response to a new strain of kovid 19.
political reporter noor haider has more
the federal government is still
assessing the impact of these new
restrictions both
singapore and hong kong have announced
that travelers who've been in the united
kingdom within the last 14 days
will not be allowed to board flights
into their countries
that's because of this new mutant strain
of covert 19
that has rapidly spread throughout
england
we know some european countries have
banned travelers from the uk at this
stage australia
isn't doing that in fact we've heard
from the chief health uh
chief medical officer paul kelly
yesterday and he was adamant that the
measures that australia has uh in
particularly hotel quarantine are enough
to
protect the spread of this virus this
new strain into the broader australian
community but
it is thought that this new uh strain is
70 percent more
transmissible although there's no
evidence at this stage
to suggest that it makes the illness
more severe there are around 40
000 australians around the world trying
to get home we know a significant
portion of them
are in the united kingdom the uk the
australian high commission
in the uk says that it's been inundated
with
calls from concerned travelers who were
anticipating to transit through those
airports
it's now looking to to see how else it
can assist those travelers
and we heard today from government front
venture david little proud
and he says the government is still
assessing uh information from singapore
and hong kong
it's only just come to light and the
foreign minister's obviously working
through
those issues with respect to singapore
we have to respect their sovereignty as
they respect ours so they're a
strategic partner of australia we'll
continue and i know that we've made a
decision not to
to cancel any uk fights and that would
continue to be the case
the communications minister paul
fletcher says proposed new cyber abuse
laws will protect
adults against harmful online trolling
under the plan changes the e-safety
commissioner will have the power to
order the takedown
of seriously abusive content if a
complaint is ignored
mr fletcher says the laws will apply to
content that is considered to be
menacing harassing or offensive and
intended to cause harm we already have a
very effective scheme to deal with
uh cyber bullying of australian children
so the way that works is that
if you have been cyber bullied you lodge
a complaint with the platform if they
don't respond quickly you can go to the
safety commissioner and she can issue an
order requiring that the material be
taken down and several thousand children
have been helped in this way this is
as things that are harmful it's cyber
abuse
and we do need to have an appropriate
standard because we've got to balance up
freedom of speech
but if it does meet that standard and
that'll be determined by the e-safety
commissioner
then she'll have the power to issue an
order to the platform be it facebook or
another platform
requiring them to take the material down
overwhelmingly what victims of savage
serious cyber abuse tell us is that they
want the material taken down but that
can be very hard to achieve today
when we first promised this in 2013 and
it took effect in 2015
there was people who said it wouldn't
work and the platforms the digital
platforms said oh
this isn't really necessary but it has
worked effectively
the platforms facebook and others have
complied with australian law
and we're now going to extend it to
cyber abuse directed against australian
adults
so of course the police are still there
and will always be there
for uh serious criminal matters but
often
because they've got so much to do um
they're only able to deal with the most
very serious cases and it can take quite
some time
for the police to work through their
processes under the under
the both the cyber bullying scheme and
the new cyber abuse
scheme um it uh the takedown can be
quite prompt indeed
it'll be the requirement will be within
24 hours of a notice being issued
and communications minister paul
fletcher says the findings of a report
into corporate expenses at australia
post will not be made public
an investigation was launched after
christine holgate revealed luxury
cartier watches were given to senior
employees
for sealing a lucrative deal their
revelations drew a furious response from
the prime minister but the australian
financial review
says ms holgate was found not to have
breached any rules
mr fletcher has refused to reveal if the
review cleared the ceo the u.s
president has granted a full pardon to
george papadopoulos a former campaign
aide
who pleaded guilty as part of the russia
investigation
in 2007 papadopoulos admitted lying to
fbi agents about his contacts with
russians during the 2016 presidential
campaign
his role came to light after he had
drinks in 2016 in london
with australia's then high commissioner
to the uk alexander downer
and told him the russians had dirt on
hillary clinton
donald trump also pardoned 14 other
people and commuted all
or part of the sentences of five more
they include former new york congressman
chris collins and a number of other
republican allies
israel is headed to the polls for the
fourth time in two years
their current government collapsed after
parliament failed to meet a midnight
deadline
to pass a new budget and that
automatically triggered new elections on
march the 23rd
prime minister benjamin netanyahu and
his main rival benigns formed a
coalition in may
but their partnership has been plagued
by mistrust and
infighting the campaign gets underway
with mr netanyahu facing public anger
over his handling of the pandemic
and he's also on trial for alleged
corruption
an agreement has been reached to lift
the freight blockade at the british port
of dover
stranded truck drivers will soon begin
receiving coronavirus tests
that would allow them to cross the
channel to france if they return a
negative result
europe correspondent lynton besser has
more from london
3 000 lorries now are stuck at dover
they're parked
along the major southeastern highway um
they're jammed right there in the in the
port they've been
marshalled into a disused airfield
it's absolute chaos down there and
still there's no deal in sight the
transport secretary
for britain grant chaps put out a tweet
only a few minutes ago saying
there has been good progress on an
agreement and i'll have more to say
shortly but it's not much comfort for
all of those lorry drivers
who are stuck down there they've been
holding impromptu protests and for
pretty good reason it's not
their fault they've got no toilets no
fresh water
no food on monday night all they got
from the local council
was a muesli bar and remember of course
this is a
a tier 4 lockdown area in a global
pandemic
you know these poor blokes and they are
mostly blokes don't look like they're
going to get home uh you know for
christmas that there was one lorry
driver from romania
who has got a 45-hour drive non-stop
uh if he's going to make it back i mean
that looks pretty unlikely
the the eu is trying to formulate
some continent-wide policy because most
member states have now
uh you know closed their border to
britain in fear of this new
coronavira coronavirus variant
uh but you know the the the chaos
continues in in many respects
it's some kind of glimpse into what a
hard brexit might look like
which by the way is only a week away and
and there's no deal on that front either
just by the by italy has now suffered
more deaths in the second wave of the
virus than it did in the first
and today britain has um accounted for
more coronavirus patients in one day
than at any other time this year thirty
six thousand
eight hundred and four it's a sixty
percent increase
or thereabouts uh on a week ago uh
and 691 deaths uh i think from memory in
the peak
uh back in march we kind of peaked over
here at over a thousand deaths a day
so unfortunately it looks like we're
climbing back up towards that total and
i know
hospitals particularly in wales actually
are completely
overwhelmed um so uh you know
there are calls for a full-on national
lockdown there are already 17 million
people
like me in london who have been told to
stay home
query whether that order is going to be
given nationwide
let's get the finance news now here's
david chow and david there are reports
that apple is planning to develop a
self-driving car
uh what tell us more about this yeah so
this is a project apple's been working
on for
years a bit unevenly so the latest
report says that they're trying to ramp
up
this uh project to release an electronic
car in four years aimed at everyday
consumers
and the key is to create a new battery
and that can take the car further so
this
project titan is being reported on by
reuters
and it's boosted apple's share price in
recent days apple hasn't commented on
this story but what makes this story
interesting today
is who weighed in on it and it was elon
musk the ceo of tesla
now he tweeted earlier today saying that
he reached out to apple's ceo tim cook
a few years ago during the darkest days
he said of the model 3 program
to discuss the possibility of apple
taking over tesla
for a tenth of its current value so
right now tesla's worth
805 billion dollars so a tenth of that
would be 80 and a half
billion dollars and uh musk says that
tim cook
refused to take the meeting and now uh
tesla back then was struggling with mass
production
how to produce the model 3 in high
volume
capacity but it's overcome these
problems now and has uh delivered a
string of quarterly profits and it's now
made
tesla a very valuable company so it's
recently been admitted
uh to the s p 500 which is one of uh you
know the index for the most valuable
american companies so the idea that
apple could have taken over tesla that's
basically what uh musk seems to be
driving at
uh so we've only heard from musk we
haven't heard from tim cook or apple so
it'll be interesting to see if this
story develops further
and the unions are taking qantas to the
high court this is over a controversial
ruling about what kind of leave the
airlines staff
are entitled to what's this all about
yeah so uh the unions have been taking
uh qantas to court this is a high court
appeal based
on uh you know they lost the federal
court case and a full federal court case
so
it's about what kind of leave the
workers can take so
a court decision in lower court said
that qantas workers who've been stood
down during the coronavirus pandemic
are not entitled to sick leave or
compassionately but they can get annual
leave
and a job keeper so the court's uh
reasoning was quite artificial
essentially saying
you can't take sick leave because you
weren't technically required to be
at work there's no leave from work to be
taken so
this is basically the last avenue for
appeal and a lot of companies out there
are closely watching this decision
because ramifications for not just the
airline industry but all companies
and what's happening on the markets well
the market looks like um at this rate
it's going to finish
higher which is a good sign because it's
been falling for three days in a row
so i guess the latest news about the
sydney northern beach covert cluster
uh has been taken positive that you know
the case load now
is uh smaller than it was days ago so we
take a look at the market now the asx
200 and the all lords up close to
one percent and nearly every sector
is trading higher especially energy
stocks
now let's take a look at the top and the
bottom movers so
flight center qantas and webjet they
are some of the best performers today
and uh on the flip side
gold miners are not doing so well
because
of a fall in the spot price of the
precious metal
now iron oil prices also fell quite
sharply so that's dragged down the share
price of bhp but iron oil prices are
still
at an eight year high now the australian
dollar has risen a little bit to 75.5
uss but
currency experts predict it could rise
to 80 u.s cents by the end of next year
thanks to
strong demand for iron ore from china
and a weakening u.s
dollar trend now taking a look at asia
markets new zealand and shanghai are
doing well
up one percent hong kong is up by modest
half a percent while japan is up
slightly
up by a quarter of one percent and
they're doing better than u.s
markets the s p 500 fell slightly for
the third day in a row while the dow
jones lost two thirds of one percent
and tech stocks boosted the nasdaq by
half a percent all this despite the fact
u.s congress has passed a trillion
dollar stimulus bill
and the asx actually followed a strong
lead from europe for a change
germany and france made strong gains and
they've recovered some of their heavy
losses from the previous day
now the price of gold has risen slightly
to 1866 us dollars an ounce while oil
prices fell sharply overnight west texas
crude
down below 47 u.s per barrel
and gemma that is the latest in finance
news thanks dave
the drought has broken in victoria's
grain belt and many farmers
are banking an income for the first time
in years
when the abc visited millewa in the
state's remote northwest
last year the paddocks were so dry they
were forming sand dunes across roads
after a solid year of rain the grain
harvesters are busy and farmers are
preparing for a happy christmas
in the most remote corner of northwest
victoria
you'll find a rare group of people those
who are delighted with how
2020 has gone at the moment we're uh
standing in 800 hectares of wheat and
yeah pretty happy with the way things
are going when the abc
visited the region 12 months ago it was
a different
story the last few seasons went from bad
to worse really and
well last year as uh probably well it
was a dry so i've seen it
but after a year of solid rainfall dusty
paddocks have come to life
and grain crops are being harvested
the sheep don't need hand feeding
anymore and for the first time in years
they'll finally make some money it
hasn't been the best crop that we've
ever grown but
it's important been a bloody damn good
one and uh if we get another year like
this again next year you know
we'll be getting somewhere back to uh
sitting pretty when we caught up with an
s
lambert last year emotions were raw
how do you beat mother nature
here we are but 12 months on
her paddocks have come to life it's just
amazing
we've got grain more grain than we know
what to do with
we put in three paddocks of barley for
our sheep
and the most amazing things happened the
sheep were unable to eat it all
in the milwaukee things will be a little
different this christmas
tears of joy tears of happiness the way
the season's turned out this year has
been a real shot in the arm
for the area it's good to see the local
pub open again and that's something we
can all drink to
shari von hirschner abc news milawa
it's time for the weather now with
graham creed and graham severe
thunderstorms are active in the northern
territory
yeah they are right on the border with
queensland at the moment once again
is the potential of heavy rainfall with
these storms and they are going to
remain a feature over the coming days
not only for the northern territory but
also into queensland it's all associated
with the monsoon trough
in the north of the territory and
another trough that extends across
central parts of the territory into
queensland which is what's going to
spark quite an outbreak of showers and
storms
now it really starts to kick off through
queensland as we move through tomorrow
and it will persist into christmas day
that trough is very slow moving so we've
got multiple days of localized heavy
rainfall with those
showers and thunderstorms for new south
wales
it's going to be generally dry for
christmas eve we will see some showers
developing about the
south coast but they spread up the coast
as we move through
christmas day they won't push very far
inland though they're mostly on the
ranges
and coast clear dry and generally sunny
for victoria there could be a few
isolated showers around the ranges to
the east of melbourne
these are going to be very patchy and
very light and they'll clear quite
quickly and it's a dry and sunny day for
christmas day tasmania also looking at
the possibility of showers about the
west and south one or two in the
afternoon about the northeast
they should clear away although it still
remains relatively cloudy about the west
and south of the state for christmas day
south australia clear dry
and mostly sunny very warm to hot
conditions across the entire state very
little change over the coming days it's
due to a high pressure system which is
the dominant feature
now we've also got heat through the
south west of western australia a very
hot day for perth but once that chop
moves
onshore on christmas day we start to see
the sea breeze kick in and provide a
little bit of coastal relief but it
remains hot over the more inland areas
widespread rainfall continuing across
the top end of the territory
interesting that darwin has recorded
average rainfall for december
we're still set to see another six or
seven very wet days to end out the month
now having a look at the accumulated
falls over the next four day period
and they will be fairly widespread and
substantial in the northern territory
that trough through queensland becomes
fairly active as well
and we just see a few showers about
parts of the eastern states
the top stories on abc news the new
south wales premier is slightly easing
coronavirus restrictions over christmas
greater sydney residents will be limited
to 10 visitors for three days from
tomorrow
but children under 12 won't count
towards that limit the northern beaches
will be divided into
two zones the northern area will remain
in strict lockdown but people will be
allowed to have up to five other locals
in their homes for christmas
residents in the southern district won't
be allowed to travel outside the area
but will be allowed to have up to 10
visitors plus children
an investigation is underway after
police shot dead a man in western sydney
the shooting happened in saint mary's
after police followed the 20 year old to
his home
before a confrontation took place the
man suffered a cardiac
arrest and couldn't be revived the man
who killed two women who vanished from
the perth suburb of clermont
is being sentenced in the wa supreme
court today
bradley robert edwards was convicted of
murdering jane rimmer in 1996
and here at glennon in 1997.
the former telstra worker has been in
custody for just over four years
and justice stephen hall could order
that edwards never be released
and in qriket australian batsman david
warner has been ruled out of the boxing
day test in melbourne
qriket australia says warner hasn't
recovered from a groin injury
suffered in the one day international
series against india
let's get more now on our top story
about the coronavirus cluster
in sydney's northern beaches premier
gladys spirit jaclyn
has announced a slight easing of
restrictions in parts of sydney to allow
for family gatherings
over christmas in relation to regional
new south wales
there will be no changes in relation to
greater sydney there will be no changes
but for one tweak and that is on the
24th
the 25th and the 26th you can have of
course 10 people into your home
but you'll be able to have in addition
to that children under 12. but can i
stress
you cannot have different groups of 10
people during the day
it's one group of 10 and you have to
stick to that one group of 10
plus kids under 12. in relation to the
northern beaches
both the science and the health advice
tells us that there are two distinct
parts of the northern beaches and we
will be separating those areas
geographically
so clearly uh the concentration of cases
the epicenter
of the cluster is in the northern part
of the northern beaches
so there will be now a new boundary at
the narrowbeam bridge which is a local
locals as minister hazard would know is
an obvious location for locals
and the western boundary will be near
the baja temple at monaval road which
again to locals is a very
distinguishable boundary
now if you are a resident of the
northern northern part of the northern
beaches if you are a resident that lives
north of the narrowbeam bridge
and east of the baja temple at monaval
road
you cannot leave your area you are still
in lockdown
you can't accept anybody from outside
your community and i apologize for that
but we have to maintain a lockdown in
that area with one exception
on the 24th the 25th and 26th you're
allowed to have five people into your
home
but they must be people from within that
region now for the southern part
uh of the northern beaches so for people
who might live in in manly or awakened
or dui
on the 24th 25th and 26th you will be
able to have
10 people into your home however
you can't leave the area you can have
other people coming from the region or
from other parts of greater sydney but
you yourself
can't leave we don't want people from
the northern beaches
mingling in other parts of sydney at
this stage but you can welcome people in
for more on this northern beaches mp
jason polinski joins us now to discuss
the impact on the community
jason this has been a surprise for many
that their christmas can go ahead
as planned or near enough were you
expecting this
uh look i was hoping for it to be honest
um
you know the the data the medical advice
the science was
all pointing to it being a possibility
so i think that what we've ended up with
is um obviously going to be a
disappointment to some people
um especially those people on the
northern beaches who are not from
directly from the affected area but
it's what we ne what the medical experts
are
telling us what we need to do to keep
the community safe and to ensure
that this virus doesn't spread further
yeah so it's splitting the area into
north and south for the northern beaches
do you think that's the right call
look i i think from the very beginning
um
the lockdown on the entire northern
beaches was i think done because that's
the council area so it was done on the
basis of the local government area
but when you looked at the data most of
the outbreak was in avalon
and obviously dissipated slightly out
from avalon
but it has been very concentrated and
very contained in avalon so
it's really unfortunate for those people
in avalon and the surrounding areas
those people i guess behind the
covert curtain for this christmas um
that they won't be able to have a normal
christmas after
such an unnormal year but this has just
been really bad timing and
uh the new south wales health department
has shown itself once again why it's
the world leader in this sort of
tracking and tracing and containing this
most virulent of viruses
and where do you fit in with this
temporary arrangement and has it changed
christmas
for you it has um my wife's father
actually
had an emergency operation a couple of
weeks ago
they live in port macquarie we were
hoping to spend christmas with them this
year
so we have been badly impacted by um
these arrangements i'm
i'm i'm still in the northern beaches
biosphere but uh
i'm um not behind the cover curtain i'm
i'm in colorado but still we won't be
able to leave the area
um we'll be able to spend christmas with
my parents but she won't be able to see
her father for christmas which
is causing you know some degree of angst
yeah understandable
and um i mean you are in amongst it how
are people feeling about the cluster
situation
also the subsequent lockdown and have
you been able to gauge much of the
reaction to this reprieve
given you are in lockdown uh look um
i went out and did some shopping this
morning um by that stage we still hadn't
had the announcement
people were very hopeful that we would
be
able to have a normal christmas or
something approximating a normal
christmas
obviously a lot of people feared that we
wouldn't be able to do that
but the sense of community on the
northern beaches from the moment this
outbreak was revealed last week to even
today
has been just extraordinary the phone
calls and emails that i've been getting
from people saying
look this you know this isn't great um
they've been using sometimes stronger
language than that
but when you compare our christmas to
that that many other people are having
in many other parts of the world
it still isn't too bad i think that sort
of level of
understanding and contextualising up
here is what's really set the community
apart why you've seen so many people
come out and get tested
and why people have been so
understanding under very difficult
circumstances
it is a nuanced approach do you think
there will be confusion genuine
confusion also possibly willful
ignorance
and will it also be hard to go back to a
lockdown situation come the 27th
um look my hope is that the data that
we've seen over the last few days
continues that trend continues
and if that trend continues then
obviously you want to leave this with
the medical experts and and follow the
science
but you would have to say if the trend
continues the way that it is continuing
then going back into lockdown won't nest
won't necessarily be
necessary obviously we want to take a
precautionary approach
but the approach that we've taken in new
south wales over many months on this
issue
has proven to be very effective i think
that the government the department of
health
gladys barry jacolian has managed to get
the complete buy-in from the community
and that's why we haven't had to have
onerous and mandatory
um requirements brought in she's been
able to rely on the cooperation
and the buy-in from the community not
just here on the northern beaches but
across sydney
and that has proven to be a far more
effective approach generally when you
look at
other parts of the world when you allow
people to buy in
and to cooperate with health authorities
that's been a far more effective
approach
what about people seeking exemptions to
this current arrangement on
compassionate grounds
uh be it over this christmas period or
or the wider lockdown
where do they go to seek out information
on that
um so gemma there's um they can go to
the new south wales department of health
to both get information and application
for that
the phone number is one three hundred
two double eight
triple two um there's also an email
address to attach that if they prefer to
email the department of health
um i've i've actually sent that to you
guys because it's quite a long and
convoluted one
but that is the best way people want to
go about
seeking an exemption there are grounds
on compassionate
grounds that you can seek an exemption
to leave the northern beaches if you
need to
and i encourage anyone who's worried
about that to ring one three hundred
two double a triple two and seek more
information
and jason before we let you go um
testing rates on the northern beaches
have been phenomenal are you worried
that they're going to drop right off
over this period
well you would expect to see a drop off
because i think we're nearing about
a hundred percent so um there would be
some people going back for a second go
gym or if they stay at this rate
uh but look um that has been the one of
the major factors in us being able to
contain this virus
on the northern beaches and right across
sydney which is so many people have come
out to get tested
which has given our health authorities
the sort of data they need to make
accurate um predictions
and not only reliable ones but ones that
they can have confidence in
so i'd encourage anyone once again who
has even the mildest of symptoms
to go and get tested to keep looking at
the new south wales department of health
website to see as those venues get
updated
and look my daughter and i went and got
tested yesterday
we were sat in line for about an hour it
seemed to go much faster than that
and it's really worth doing just even to
keep both your neighbours your community
and family and friends safe over this
christmas and new year period northern
beaches mp jason felinsky thank you
thanks gemma police are conducting
border checks as motorists enter
victoria from new south wales
reporter michaela ortellin has more from
aubry wodonga
it's a massive operation here along the
border there's over 30 checkpoints set
up right across the new south wales
victorian border with around 700 police
officers manning those checkpoints
now there was a request put out to the
adf to see if they could supply
i think the number was around 300
personnel they were looking for to help
with this operation
however that was uh essentially rejected
the adf said they could maybe supply 50
personnel
to help with logistics and planning so
more of the behind the scenes stuff
rather than here on the ground checking
permits and licenses
now as you can imagine that's caused
some issues within the police force
those 700 members that have been
deployed out here at the checkpoints
they've been taken off their regular
duties and some of them have come from
specialist teams such as
the counter-terrorism unit or the
homicide squad
so officers that are normally working
hard on the ground to keep the community
safe and to prevent crime
they're now standing out here checking
those licenses and
those permits so negotiations are
ongoing and
uh then victoria police are hoping that
uh
the adf come around and can supply some
additional troops in
in whatever capacity capacity it needs
to be to help them out
however they're not alone here their ses
cfa and delp have put their hand up to
assist with this operation
it's not an ideal situation police say
they'll take whatever help they can get
at this stage but
we do know we're fast approaching that
one year anniversary of the devastating
bushfires that hit last
summer so all those other emergency
services uh
would uh prefer to be planning and
and doing things that they need to be
doing to prepare for the summer season
traffic here isn't too bad today it's
moving pretty smoothly at the causeway
where i am
we do know that uh on the hume highway
uh motorists were experiencing delays of
up to five
hours at one point now uh there's been
discussions of well calls uh for a truck
lane to be set up
on the human highway that was uh
implemented uh
back in july when the the previous
border closure happened
there was a dedicated track lane all
other motorists could use the other lane
and that was just to get those trucks
and transport vehicles through a little
quicker
uh here at the causeway there has been
an additional third lane set up as well
it hasn't been used yet but officers
tell me if traffic does get bad
they will use that third lane to help
ease congestion there so
border residents as you can imagine are
frustrated that this is happening again
especially so close to christmas
but we can only hope that the traffic
moves pretty smoothly and that all those
teething issues that we're seeing at the
start of this operation
are slowly ironed out and it's uh it's a
smooth operation coming closer to
christmas
the cluster that plunged south australia
into the nation's strictest lockdown
is officially closed it's been 28 days
since the state recorded an active case
from the parafield cluster
which was first discovered on november
14. the state's chief health officer
says despite the welcome news the
situation in new south wales
is a timely reminder to stay vigilant
we could have been looking at a very
different christmas 39 days ago when the
parafield cluster emerged
there were severe concerns that we might
have a particularly disrupted christmas
it is a tribute to the public health
team and to the people of south
australia and the hard work that's been
done
that we are able today to celebrate the
closure of the parafield cluster
we have zero new cases in south
australia which is very pleasing
people are aware though of course of
that ongoing problem in new south wales
with northern beaches in particular
and as you know we do have border
restrictions in place for south
australia
we know that is very disruptive for
people with holiday plans but it is
absolutely the right thing to do to keep
south australians safe
particularly over this holiday period an
australian democracy advocate jailed in
china for almost two years has
declared he is stronger than ever in a
heartfelt message to family and friends
ahead of christmas
andrew greene has more from canberra
this involves a
writer chinese-born writer who's an
australian citizen
yang heng he's been detained by chinese
authorities since january last year so
approaching the two-year mark for the
first 18 months of his detention
he had no access to a lawyer and his
detention has coincided with a
deterioration
in relations between australia and
china now he's accused of espionage it's
a charge
he denies but the democracy blogger
has managed to get a message out just
before christmas to his
friends and supporters it's quite
heartbreaking when you read it
in uh one section he writes i met you in
a dream several times
it seems so real i regretted having had
to wake up
i wanted to pull you out of the dream
and hug you tightly
so yang heng-jun is assuring his
supporters that he remains strong
and that he will continue to fight for
his release he believes
he can get justice in the chinese system
and he'll continue to fight to clear his
name we had
anticipated that a trial would happen in
january so next month
but this week we learned that that had
been delayed by several months so
probably not until april next year it's
taken a long time for chinese
authorities to even formally
charge him with espionage but that did
happen back in october
and while he has very little access to a
lawyer or consular visits
he is maintaining his uh positivity
from what we gather in this message and
he says he's been interrogated
and tortured more than 300 times in his
almost two years in detention so it's a
heartbreaking case and one that the
australian government is closely
monitoring
but given the state of diplomatic
relations there appears to be very
little
australia can do for this writer on its
busiest days parliament house welcomes
more than 5
000 people kovit 19 forced the building
to shut its doors earlier this year
to guests lobbyists and even some
politicians
well the good news is that parliament is
open again and the abc
took a tour with guide rosie bruce
[Applause]
[Music]
good morning everyone welcome to
parliament house
head over there you're going to meet
you're very sure display players
hello i'm rosie bruce welcome to
parliament house
i've been here 20 years this year and i
think on average that might mean
i have done between 14 to 15 000 tours
so come with me i'll show you around
so just here we have this black granite
it comes from an
inland seabed in belgium it dates
approximately 340 million years old
has marine fossils in it including our
celebrity fossil
sean the prawn
this is the queen's terrace and people
come up here to have a look at the view
have coffee have some lunch but little
do they know
that right under their feet is a time
capsule
in the time capsule we have blueprints
of the building
coins and currency from 1988 stamps and
photographs
and the question we get asked the most
is when will it be open well we don't
know the answer to that
but the building has a life span of 200
years and beyond
so everyone knows what the outside of
parliament house looks like but here we
are
right in the very heart and center of
the building and below us
is the reflective pool you hear the
rushing water
designed specifically to make sure that
we can't listen to any confidential
conversation
happening on the level below and right
up above us
the flag mass and the flag and the flags
the size of the side of a double decker
bath
it's been a very different year for all
of us in australia including parliament
house but our doors are finally open
and we're welcoming our visitors back
we're taking hundreds of visitors
through an hour
we'd love to see you so it might be a
fun thing to do for you over the
holidays
let's go to cricket now and australian
batsman david warner has been ruled out
of the boxing day test
in melbourne tom maddox joins us now
from the mcg
tom what's the latest g'day kath it's a
terrific access we get here
the media and the public to the
australians training ahead of
the boxing day test but the most notable
absence here as he noted in your
introduction is
david warner david warner has been ruled
out of
of the boxing day test uh predominantly
due to injury he suffered that groin
injury in the one day international
series against india
and despite his best debits hasn't been
able to recover
interestingly though kath he wouldn't
have been able to
play even if he was fully fit because of
qriket australia's rather strict
biosecurity protocols
so warner was in sydney he wasn't in a
hot spot
he came to melbourne to be with the
squad but
was unable to rejoin the squad and
wouldn't have been able to by the time
the boxing day test got underway because
of those
protocols how will india respond after
the heavy defeat in adelaide
yeah that's really a key question here
of course in adelaide
the australian kwiks skittled the
indians for 36
their lowest ever test score in innings
and and one eventually won by one by
eight wickets so
it's really a question of how they can
respond here particularly
without their magnificent captain in
virat kohli who
has course gone home back to india to be
with his wife for the birth of their
child also missing is
fast bowler mohamed shami who copped a
rather a nasty blow to
his wrist he fractured his wrist so he's
out for the remainder of the series so
the indian selectors have a couple of uh
issues
there but certainly today the australian
offspring and nathan lyon didn't believe
that
despite the result in adelaide that
india would have any trouble bouncing
back in melbourne we're expecting them
to come out firing
um and not have any scars from the other
day
i think cricket's a
it's a new new game new day every every
day so
you can't look too far back i know we
can't go out there expecting we're going
to
roll them out for 50 again and tom still
some doubt over the sydney test
yeah that's right gemma we were
expecting uh we are expecting an
announcement
soon hopefully from qriket australia
clarifying
as to whether the sydney test on january
the 7th will
go ahead as planned or if indeed
the coronavirus outbreak in sydney will
prevent that from happening
if that is the case the most likely
scenario it seems gemma is that
melbourne will host the boxing day test
and then we'll back it up with
another test in the new year and then
going to brisbane for the fourth test
another option is
that they play in melbourne and then
they play the final two tests
in brisbane but we are expecting
some sort of resolution from qriket
australia imminently
tom maddox in melbourne thank you
armed with a metal detector and a big
heart hobart's tim chandler has become
an unlikely community hero
he's turned his hobby into a word of
mouth community service
reuniting residents with their long-lost
items while making friends along the way
tim chandler isn't your average beach
goer armed with a metal detector on one
of his many strolls along taruna's
coastline
tim's hobby is now an obsession yeah
it's a little like fishing yeah
sometimes you get a few nibbles
and sometimes you get a really good fish
and it's the same as that tim started
hunting for lost
items two years ago motivated by his
love of history
i've probably put 50 years of detecting
into that two years
because i am obsessive and i'll go out
five six seven days a week sometimes
eight ten hours a day
it hasn't gone unnoticed on community
facebook groups
tim is alerted when precious items are
lost like alex mccain's ring
which went astray after a morning swim i
thought i'll just post on that and see
if by chance anyone has found it um
and everyone was very sympathetic and a
few people
immediately suggested tim the
detectorist
might be a job for him tim got in touch
with alex
and within five minutes the ring was
found and i really wasn't
expecting it to be found again to be
honest so i was just so happy that it'd
been found
it's not the only sentimental item he's
found he's a master collection of coins
war medals and strange finds from
tasmania's past
it's the nearest thing to owning a time
machine and it's true
you know you find something from 1700
early 1800s and it makes me
imagine the people what they are wearing
the voices word of tim's skills has
spread throughout the toruna community
cool tim cool tim absolutely and uh give
him a nice reward he really likes
sausage rolls i can be a bit prone to
depression whatever you want to call it
and i've found this is hugely great
therapy
being out and about it's really zen you
know you're just in the moment
megan mcdonald abc news
it's time for the weather now with
graham creed and graham we've still got
these thunderstorms in the northern
territory yeah severe thunderstorms
around the border areas the
barclay and also the carpenter region
unfortunately there's very few gauges
across this region
so it's pretty hard to tell exactly how
much rain is falling from those storms
at the moment but they do seem to be
very active
across the region also get a little bit
of activity in central australia a
little bit more widespread across the
far north and darwin has recorded
average
december rainfall so far and we've still
got a week of
wet weather to go now looking at the
lead up into christmas day queensland a
trough over the inland is going to spark
widespread showers and thunderstorms
potential of severe activity with
moderate heavy falls christmas day we'll
see that trough remain very active
around the central and northern parts
but substantially lighter falls in the
south the new south wales it's a trough
moving up the coast
it's relatively weak it will bring a few
isolated showers they'll spread into the
central and northern parts on christmas
day
we're not expecting widespread or heavy
falls associated with that
in victoria just a brief shower about
parts of southeastern melbourne
for the most part it will be dry
christmas day clear dry and mostly sunny
conditions
and relatively pleasant temperatures
we've also
got dry conditions for christmas day in
tasmania but ahead of it widespread
showers about the west and the northeast
one or two about
the southeast corner but by friday
really just just does just dry out to be
partly cloudy
for south australia also dry and sunny
we're looking
at very warm conditions across most of
the state we start to pick up a little
bit across the north as we
move through christmas day for western
australia
very hot conditions for perth but once
that trough crosses the coast we'll
start to see the sea breezes kick back
in a little bit earlier
on christmas day and that'll help
provide some relief although inland
areas still expected to remain very hot
widespread showers and thunderstorms
across the northern territory we are
expecting to see
widespread falls the possibility of some
localised heavy falls again
across the far north and if we have a
look at the accumulated falls over the
next four day period
northern territory and queensland show
up the highest of the totals
that trough just bringing some weak
falls across parts of new south wales
thanks graeme and that is abc news for
now remember you can keep up to date
at news.abc.net.u and on abc iview
i'm gemma venez and coming up on the abc
news channel we'll have the latest on
today's top stories
plus calls for more australians to learn
snake bite first aid
following an increase in activity thanks
for joining us
[Music]
[Applause]
i just let a magician interact with me
breathing your mind tonight
wait a second now this is getting crazy
now
are you from another planet yeah you are
full of surprises
so crazy don't you love it i am having a
great time
abc tv plus starts january 1
9 8 this new year's eve the parties at
yours
stay home with the abc for the biggest
night of the year
at 8 30 join rove for
and at nine charlie pickering and zan
rowe bring you australia's biggest stars
there's only one place to be this new
year's eve that's your place with the
abc
from 8 30 on abc and iview
changes we've made to help stop the
spread need to continue into the future
remember to keep making covert safe
choices
like maintaining physical distancing
practicing good hygiene
and wearing a mask when needed to
protect others stay at home when unwell
and get tested for covert 19 keep the
covert safe app active
so you can be contacted if needed
together let's keep going
and stay safe find out more at
health.gov.eu
authorised by the australian government
canberra
a-league and w league football is on
live and free
every single weekend the rivalries
the goals who's gonna make it to the
finals
[Music]
every weekend on abc and streaming on
iview
hey
[Music]
love again
today residents in sydney set to enjoy a
slight easing of restrictions for family
gatherings over christmas
for all of greater sydney for all of the
northern part of the northern beaches
we will revert back to existing
conditions on the 27th of december
[Music]
investigations underway after police
shoot dead a 20-year-old man in sydney's
west
the man convicted of murdering two women
in the perth suburb of claremont in the
1990s to be sentenced today
and australian batsman david warner
ruled out of the boxing day test in
melbourne due to a groin injury
hello and welcome to abc news i'm gemma
venice
coronavirus restrictions will be eased
in parts of sydney tomorrow
in time for christmas day new south
wales has recorded eight new cases of
kovid 19 in the past day
seven are linked to the northern beaches
cluster there are modest changes for
greater sydney
10 adults will be allowed to visit a
home plus children under the age of 12.
the northern beaches will be separated
into two zones with a new boundary at
narrabeen bridge
in the northern zone five people will be
allowed to visit a home they all must be
from within that region
people in the southern zone such as
manly or dui will be allowed to have 10
people visit their homes
however local residents will not be
allowed to leave the area
reporter james carmody has more from the
northern beaches
when they were announced i was at a
butcher's shop in belgala
and generally people there were quite
pleased with the changes that's in
the southern part of the northern
beaches so they'll be allowed
10 people plus the kids for christmas
we were speaking with the butcher there
and he said people
we saw people sorry turning up knowing
how many they can cater for on christmas
day now
and christmas will look much more like
normal for them than it otherwise might
have done
there were people there though who still
have family on
the northern side of the northern
beaches and they'll be cut off from them
where i am now is at the narrabeen
bridge and
things here are a lot more complicated
because there's
really people live either side of this
bridge but the rules are quite different
just a stone throw away over the water
here
we spoke with people who were doing
their shopping on this side of the
bridge on the southern side
but they live on the northern side they
won't be able to come across anymore
from the 24th
through to the uh the day after
christmas and we spoke with people who
they have mothers in uh we spoke with a
woman who has a mother in a nursing home
on the other side of the bridge won't be
able to spend christmas with her
we spoke to a father and his young son
now the son usually spends most of the
time with his mother
who lives on the south side of narrabeen
the father lives in north narrabeen he's
urgently seeking clarification
as to whether he'll be able to see his
young son on christmas day
now the premier said that it will be
tough many of these restrictions for
some people but she said it's
what must be done right now i still
don't know
how the virus got into the avalon
cluster we don't know how the virus got
into the community and we want to make
sure that there aren't
strains or there aren't lines of
community transmission that we haven't
found yet
so can i please stress that for all of
greater sydney
for all of the northern part of the
northern beaches we will revert back to
existing conditions on the 27th of
december
but the jury is out for the southern
part of the northern beaches for the
precinct
that's not that that contentious or that
that avalon cluster that concentration
the juries out as to what happens on the
27th of december but for the rest of us
we go back to what we have today and
james what do we know about the case
numbers
so after a extremely high number of
tests conducted again there was
only eight cases again today seven of
those were linked to that avalon cluster
which now numbers
97 and the other was one that was
reported yesterday that was a healthcare
worker working
transporting patients
queensland police have warned travellers
who attempt to illegally enter the state
from coronavirus hot spots
that they will be caught more than a
hundred people attempting to enter the
state were turned away just yesterday
the premier anastasia palestine says
states and territories have closed their
borders
based on independent health advice it is
not just queensland that took
the tough measures of shutting the
borders with new south wales
the health advice of nearly every other
health officer across
this the country was advising their
respective leaders
exactly the same thing independently so
these are measures because there has
been a cluster
outbreak in the northern beaches if
there hadn't been the cluster outbreak
in the northern beaches
well no one would have had to take these
measures and everybody would have been
seeing their family and friends over
this christmas new year period but i
think it's a bit rich
for new south wales to start blaming
queensland and victoria and whichever
other state and territory
she wants to blame this has happened in
new south wales
it has happened in the northern beaches
and we wish them
all the very best but we do not want our
lifestyle compromised at this point in
time so as soon as they get on top of
that
uh the sooner we can get back to life as
semi-normal as possible but let me also
say this
we also know that with more and more
people coming in
returning home from overseas there is a
higher chance
of more cases in hotel quarantine which
is what we are seeing
so we need to be and as i've said this
before
absolutely strict when it comes to our
hotel quarantine in queensland
and across the nation
to breaking news now and the clermont
killer bradley robert edwards has been
sentenced to a minimum of 40 years
for the murders of jane rimmer and kyra
glennon
now reporter charlotte hamlin joins us
from outside the supreme court in perth
what can you tell us oh good afternoon
this sentence
has just been handed down moments ago
bradley edwards the man accused of
plucking jane rimmer
and kyra glennon from the streets of
claremont in 1996 and 1997
murdering them and dumping their bodies
at opposite ends of perth has been
sentenced to life in prison with a
minimum term of 40 years
that will make him 92 years old when
he's eligible for parole
so clearly it's highly unlikely that
this killer is ever going to emerge from
prison
there was some expectation that bradley
edwards may be handed the state's
harshest
possible penalty of life in prison
without the prospect of parole
however he was spared that with the
judge saying that he believed community
expectation
for this penalty would be met if this
very high minimum sentence was handed
down
there have been family members in court
today it's been a highly
emotional hearing and people are
expected to emerge
from the courtroom behind me shortly
charlotte a very high profile case
and bradley edwards managed to elude
police for 20 years
this is a case that has been talked
about for decades if you are from
perth you know a lot about it bradley
edwards was arrested
four years ago at his modest cue dale
home in a seemingly shock development in
this very long-running
and extensive murder investigation and
he was charged with in fact the murders
of three women so jane rimmer kiera
glennon and also sarah spears
last uh in september rather he was found
not guilty of sarah spears murder with
the judge saying there was not enough
physical evidence to convict him of that
crime her body has never
been found so while today will bring
some answers
potentially some closure for the rimmer
and glennon families
for don spears sarah's father who's been
in court for most of this seven month
trial
and who's in court behind me today no
justice delivered for him
charlotte this is breaking news of
course so we can see the reporters and
cameras gathering behind you
to get reaction from the family uh can
you tell us a bit about what we heard in
the victim impact statements today
yes absolutely as i said earlier it's
been a really emotional day
in court not only was bradley edwards
charged with the three murders and
ultimately found guilty of two of them
he was also found guilty of attacks on
two other women in the years before the
claremont disappearances
one on a woman who slept in her
huntingdale home
and the other a brutal rape of a woman
at a local cemetery just near the suburb
of claremont
both of those women have delivered
victim impact statements
in person today the huntingdale victim
talked about the lasting impact that
that attack
back in 1988 had on her life that
bradley edwards had become
the villain of her nightmares and that
this trial had exposed one of the worst
moments of her life
to the world the other victim the
karakata victim who was raped at the
cemetery
delivered a very stoic victim impact
statement she described bradley edwards
as pathetic
as a coward and a person that only
slipped through the cracks for 20 years
because he was just so
unremarkable so it's been an incredible
day in court and there was a huge round
of applause when that
very harsh penalty was handed down a
short time ago here charlotte tell us a
bit about the trial and how long it took
it was a seven month trial so one of the
most extensive in western australia's
legal history certainly one of the most
watched the trial judge stephen hall
persevered
through the pandemic insisting that this
trial would keep going
even when other criminal trials here in
wa were being put on hold
so it's been quite an extraordinary year
for wa's legal system
unprecedented interest in this matter
during the verdict uh in september huge
crowds gathered outside this court
people lined up out the front before
dawn to try to secure
a seat in the courtroom and there was an
element of that again this morning with
people
gathering eager to see a line drawn
under this case and
some sort of end to what's been a really
dark chapter of perth's history
reporter charlotte hamlin thank you for
bringing us up to date with that
breaking news
and we will be back there shortly when
we hear from the families of the victims
thank you
an investigation is underway into the
fatal police shooting of a man in the
backyard of his western sydney home
reporter mark ready is at st mary's when
four police officers approached bradley
bowsen outside a hotel in said mary's he
ran
he was chased by two senior constables
who then
cornered him in the backyard of his own
home
there he threatened the officers before
grabbing one of their guns and firing a
shot
missing both of those officers a violent
confrontation took place
the 20 year old's dog bit one of the
officers as he was retrieving his gun
at that officer then fired a fatal shot
mr balzen was treated by paramedics at
the scene
but sadly died his family say the
officers that chased him
were in plain clothes although police
could not confirm that
this incident will now be subject to an
internal police investigation
tragically unfortunately that male has
died as a result of that gunshot wound
the matter is now being independently
investigated by the homicide squad
and importantly it's being oversighted
by the law enforcement conduct
commission
police would not say why they initially
approached mr belzon
other than he was acting suspiciously
his family members are now struggling to
comprehend their loss
mr balzen is an only child uh
neighbors also have expressed their
shock
is shocking for sure i don't know why
they can't use other
forms of force first maybe a taser or
something why they have to shoot him i
don't know but
it is tragic these things do happen and
i'm sorry to hear about it
i was devastated i mean i don't know him
but
i see him often in this um on the
neighborhood
mr balzen's family would not speak on
camera they were too
devastated but they did say that he was
recently mugged in this area
and they say that it would be
understandable that he would have run
from police if they were in fact in
plain clothes
no doubt that will be part of this
ongoing investigation
the man who killed two women who
vanished from the perth suburb of
claremont in the 1990s
has found out that he will spend at
least 40 years in jail
having eluded police for 20 years
bradley edwards was
found guilty in september of the two
murders plus earlier attacks on two
other women reporter francis bell joins
us now
from outside the court and uh francis
the sentence has been handed down
and my apologies we don't have that
cross at the moment we will get back
there shortly
hundreds of bikies have hit the streets
of perth today to attend the funeral of
former rebels boss nick martin
mr martin was shot dead at perth
motorplex earlier this month reporter
jessica warrener
is outside the pinaroo cemetery in perth
we're starting to see
hundreds of people arrive for the
funeral of the former rebels boss nick
martin here at pinaroo cemetery north of
perth
the procession started out at north
perth in a funeral home
has taken its way up the west coast
highway and now is arriving here we're
still seeing traffic choke the streets
even though most of the mourners have
made their way inside mr martin was
fatally shot at the perth motorplex in
quinana a couple of weeks ago in front
of hundreds of onlookers and jessica
who's in attendance
in attendance today we've got mr
martin's family and friends
and hundreds of rebel bikies the police
were advising that they were expecting
people to travel from interstate as well
apart from new south wales
but police have been quite firm in
saying that no matter how many bikes we
get here today
police will be outnumbering them and the
community should feel safe
and as for the investigation has nick
martin's shooter
been found nick martin's shooter is
still at large and the state government
has actually put forward a one million
dollar reward for anyone who can come
forward with
information about what might have
happened to him the word is that
police suspect a sniper attack but we
have no further information as to who
that person is yet
australia's high commission in the uk
says it's working to find alternative
arrangements for australians
affected by new international airport
restrictions
singapore and hong kong have announced
transit restrictions on travellers from
the united kingdom
in response to a new strain of kovid 19.
political reporter noor haider has more
the federal government is still
assessing the impact of these new
restrictions both singapore
and hong kong have announced that
travelers who've been in the united
kingdom within the last 14 days
will not be allowed to board flights
into their countries
that's because of this new mutant strain
of covert 19
that has rapidly spread throughout
england
we know some european countries have
banned travelers from the uk at this
stage australia
isn't doing that in fact we've heard
from the chief health
chief medical officer paul kelly
yesterday and he was adamant that the
measures that australia has uh in
particularly hotel quarantine are enough
to
protect the spread of this virus this
new strain into the broader australian
community but
it is thought that this new uh strain is
70 percent more
transmissible although there's no
evidence at this stage uh to suggest
that it makes the illness
more severe there are around 40 000
australians around the world trying to
get home we know a significant portion
of them
are in the united kingdom the uk the
australian high commission
in the uk says that it's been inundated
with calls from concerned travelers who
were anticipating to transit through
those airports
it's now looking to to see how else it
can assist those travelers
and we heard today from government front
venture david little proud
and he says the government is still
assessing uh information from singapore
and hong kong
it's only just come to light and the
foreign minister's obviously working
through
those issues with respect to singapore
we have to respect their sovereignty as
they respect ours so they're
a strategic partner of australia uh
we'll continue and i know that we've
made a decision not to
to cancel any uk fights and that would
continue to be the case
the communications minister paul
fletcher says proposed new cyber abuse
laws will protect adults against harmful
online trolling under the plan changes
the e-safety commissioner
will have the power to order the
takedown of seriously abusive content
if a complaint is ignored mr fletcher
says the laws will apply to content that
is considered to be
menacing harassing or offensive and
intended to cause harm
we already have a very effective scheme
to deal with cyber bullying of
australian children so the way that
works is that
if you have been cyber bullied you lodge
a complaint with the platform if they
don't respond quickly you can go to the
safety commissioner and she can issue an
order requiring that the material be
taken down and several thousand children
have been helped in this way this is
as things that are harmful it's cyber
abuse
and we do need to have an appropriate
standard because we've got to balance up
freedom of speech
but if it does meet that standard and
that will be determined by the e-safety
commissioner
then she'll have the power to issue an
order to the platform be it facebook or
another platform
requiring them to take the material down
overwhelmingly what victims of savage
serious cyber abuse tell us is that they
want the material taken down but that
can be very hard to achieve today
when we first promised this in 2013 and
it took effect in 2015
there was people who said it wouldn't
work and the platforms the digital
platforms said oh
this isn't really necessary but it has
worked effectively
the platforms facebook and others have
complied with australian law
and we're now going to extend it to
cyber abuse directed against australian
adults
so of course the police are still there
and will always be there
for uh serious criminal matters but
often
because they've got so much to do um
they're only able to deal with the most
very serious cases and it can take quite
some time
for the police to work through their
processes under the under
the both the cyber bullying scheme and
the new cyber abuse
scheme um it uh the takedown can be
quite prompt indeed
it'll be the requirement will be within
24 hours of a notice being issued
the findings of a report into corporate
expenses at australia post will not be
made public
an investigation was launched after
christine holgate revealed
luxury cartier watches were given to
senior employees
for sealing a lucrative deal the
revelations drew a furious response from
the prime minister
but the australian financial review says
ms holgate was found not to have reached
any rules
communications minister paul fletcher
has refused to reveal if the review
cleared the ceo
the u.s president has granted a full
pardon to george papadopoulos a former
campaign aide
who pleaded guilty as part of the russia
investigation
in 2007 papadopoulos admitted lying to
fbi agents
about his contacts with russians during
the 2016 presidential campaign
his role came to light after he had
drinks in 2016 in london
with australia's then high commissioner
to the uk alexander downer
and told him the russians had dirt on
hillary clinton
donald trump also pardoned 14 other
people and commuted all or part of the
sentences of five more
they include former new york congressman
chris collins
and a number of other republican allies
and we're taking you live now to darwin
where authorities are providing a
coronavirus update
to remove that hotspot declaration for
the illawarra shire
local government area the others will
remain in place
so i know people are anxious around the
others but for those people from the
illawarra
region caught up that is good news for
them this afternoon
and we will continue to monitor very
closely as we have been
all of this that the numbers coming out
of new south wales are certainly very
promising
but we cannot make any rush decisions we
must look at the evidence
and make sure that we act to protect
territorians
[Music]
i just have concluded that i'm happy to
take any questions
uh the second point is there has been
questions around
a cabin crew staff member from qantas
that has
worked on those qantas international
repatriation flights with the
commonwealth government
that he has now tested positive to the
virus in new south wales
and i've received a briefing from the
chief health officer as well as
um the team from the national critical
care and trauma response centre
and i just wish to advise territorians
that
certainly the safety of territorians in
those repatriation flights
is the first priority this individual uh
was on the flight that arrived on the
17th into darwin
they did spend some time in darwin but
it was under strict
cho directions there is a section that
allows for flight crew
to be in the community but strictly
under guidelines
he did spend time in isolation here
before he left the northern territory
i'm also advised that we don't believe
he was infectious whilst he was in
darwin so an important point
whilst he was here he was under strict
cho guidelines
and also it's not believed that he was
infectious so we wish that individual
well
in their recovery the northern territory
authorities will work with new south
wales around any information that may be
required
so i'm providing those two points of
updates to territorians today
the lifting of the illawarra lga as a
hotspot declaration
which will be effective in in the coming
short period of time in the next hour or
so
i understand that there is a number of
people
at the howard springs site that will be
able to to leave that facility
so our emergency officials will work
through with them
around that and the declaration we
published on the website
and the second point around the
information of that qantas cabin crew
employee and the information we've
received today happy to take any
questions
so the uh flight crew and we see this
under this cho direction there is a very
strict plan they vary from
individual and from company but this is
a pre-approved plan
by the chief health officer uh to allow
them to be in the northern territory but
under strict conditions
and these vary uh whether it's from a uh
a private residence through to a hotel
but i i'm not able to provide the advice
on the specific hotel
what i am able to tell territorians is
there is a strict management plan
for each and every situation you said he
was in the community does that mean that
he wasn't in his hotel the whole time
was he happened
no i should clarify that comment i meant
when he was in the broader
top-end area my understanding and the
advice i've received is that he exited
the qantas flight through the raft side
in a private vehicle
he was at the location at the hotel that
he was meant to be at
and then he again was in a private
vehicle to go back to the airport
before he exited the northern territory
on a flight
as i said previously and it's important
for people to know
he was not we believe infectious when he
was in the northern territory
but new south wales authorities will now
piece uh all of the information around
this specific individual together
and we wish him well in his recovery we
know the majority of conscious crew
flight members very distinctive children
over here so you can't consider it
that's a hotel i think these are two
separate things uh it is well known in
the territory in the top end a small
community that the qantas flight crew
generally stay at the hilton hotel
that's an arrangement for domestic
flight crew this is someone that was on
those commonwealth repatriation flights
and the large majority are head on that
same plane back to their um state
where they're based but in some
situations uh they do
uh exit under strict under that
guideline that i just spoke about
and may go to another port
so this is something that has been
talked about nationally we have
under our direction 49 from memory the
chief health officer
has in place measures uh for flight crew
to get off international flights and
under strict conditions how they
must interact with our community or um
take precautions to protect the
community
and we need to be realistic about that
um we have seen
uh of course travel both domestically
and internationally
severely impacted but there is still a
certain element of travel that needs to
take place
repatriation flights and freight are key
points
and so the commonwealth have continued
as the virus
evolves to put in place measures and the
so have the states and territories to
protect the broader community
[Music]
so under strict conditions and it is not
common uh mostly the crew fly through
with that plane
uh but uh there is the ability under the
cho directions
uh for the airline to work through a
plan
around how someone may exit that flight
to go to another domestic port
[Music]
as i pointed out we need to be practical
of course we need to protect
uh territorians and australians from the
virus but we also need to allow for the
freight
uh we need to allow for vital medical
equipment to be flown into the northern
territory and australia more generally
and so
this is something that the jurisdictions
continue to work at a commonwealth level
and we will continue to evolve that and
if we need to put in place further
precautions we will do so
will you be forthcoming with the public
about the places that this flight
attendant has been to
so that people know if they need to go
and get tested
if that's necessary from contact tracing
officials but what
we've been told is that under uh the cho
directions there was a strict management
plan there wasn't interaction with the
community
and also this individual was not
infectious it's believed when they were
in the northern territory
pardon can you repeat your questions
i'm not aware of that detail but what i
can say is that the new south wales
uh officials are working with northern
territory and uh of course
uh if there is anything we need to do
here in the territory we will do so
and i have provided the facts today so
that territorians can understand and be
reassured that there is a very low risk
to the community
is pontius being forthcoming with the nt
government around all of the details
relating to this staff member so the uh
i became aware of this late this morning
after i spoke to the media
it was breaking when i spoke to
yourselves earlier today
um i have been briefed by the national
critical care and trauma response center
who lead that commonwealth repatriation
they indicated to me they had a direct
line to qantas and we're receiving
information
i've just come out of semci with the
chief health officer again
he had information from both new south
wales uh and qantas so
certainly i'm not led to believe that
there is a you know a lack of
information from anyone at this stage
they did publish a big press release
it's an evolving situation coronavirus
and the cases and and people are trying
to get the information out there as
quickly as possible
i'm certainly confident with the uh
sources of information that i receive
from both the national critical care and
trauma response centre and also
our chief health officer how was he
traveling to and from a hotel a private
company vehicle as i just said
he was in a private vehicle is the
information i've been advised
[Music]
this virus has certainly changed the way
the world operates and
early on we saw a significant impact
from a lack of freight
we saw it impact across medical
equipment and so we need to be practical
and so we
have the chief health officer directions
which clearly outlines
what individuals and companies must do
so that they can continue to do business
in the northern territory
but keep our communities safe and there
is penalties it's at 5 000
for an individual and significantly uh
many thousands of dollars for a company
if they do the wrong thing so
to reassure territorians they're strict
protocols
around uh the different situations the
unusual situations that we may have to
to
have to allow business in some sense to
happen
as natasha files the northern
territories health minister there giving
a kovid update
and uh the main take out from that is
that uh the new south wales illawarra
will not be considered a hot spot as far
as their hotel quarantine or
self-quarantine arrangements
are made let's get the weather now with
graham creed and
graham severe thunderstorms are active
in the northern territory yeah they are
the potential of some heavy falls around
parts of the carpentaria and the barclay
district so along the border with
queensland
this area and then through into
queensland are going to become a lot
more active over the coming days this is
due to a slow-moving trough that it's
basically going to sit
through that region we're already
starting to see a few showers and storms
developing about the central inland of
queensland this is going to be a feature
over the coming days
well past the christmas period as well
but let's have a look at what the
forecast is
for christmas eve and christmas day for
queensland increasing showers and
thunderstorms about the
particularly central and northern inland
we could see an isolated shower along
the coast
and they'll be more widespread about the
central coast where we'll also see the
potential of thunderstorms
the new south wales christmas eve sees
the southeasterly change behind a trough
moving up the south coast on christmas
day that continues to move further north
so it will trigger the potential of some
patchy showers
and thunderstorms a few very light and
isolated showers south
of the ranges in victoria these should
clear away mostly during the morning
christmas day itself should be mild dry
and mostly
sunny for tasmania we've also got the
potential of a few showers about the
west and the south and also up around
the northeastern corner in the afternoon
these also ease off on friday really
just contracting to the far west coast
and southwest corner of the state
for south australia clear drone sunny is
pretty much the story across the entire
state for christmas eve and
into christmas day just slightly milder
about the southeastern corner
but tending quite hot up across the
north
perth in for some very hot conditions
now once that trough moves inland allow
the sea breeze to kick in on christmas
day
but further north and inland we still
see very hot conditions
in association with a heat wave across
the area
for the northern territory widespread
showers and thunderstorms some possible
heavy falls once again
across the north this activity is going
to persist as we move through the
christmas period and pretty much all the
way through
in towards the new year period as well
so as far as rainfall totals go we are
looking at some stand
some substantial falls through the
northern territory particularly along
that trough in queensland
a front just after christmas will bring
some showers into the southeast
with few showers and storms in new south
wales
[Music]
the top stories on abc news new south
wales is slightly easing coronavirus
restrictions over christmas
greater sydney residents will be limited
to 10 visitors for
three days from tomorrow the children
under 12 won't count towards that limit
the northern beaches will be divided
into two zones the northern area will
remain in lockdown
but people will be allowed up to five
other locals in their homes
residents in the southern district can't
leave the area but will be allowed up to
ten visitors
the man who killed two women who
vanished from the perth suburb of
claremont
have been sentenced to a minimum of 40
years jail
bradley robert edwards was convicted of
murdering jane rimmer in 1996
and kiera glennon in 1997. the former
telstra worker had pleaded guilty to
offences related to a home invasion in
and a wraith in 1995.
an investigation is underway after
police shot dead a man in western sydney
the shooting happened in saint mary's
after police followed the 20 year old to
his home
before a confrontation took place the
man suffered a cardiac arrest and
couldn't be revived
and in cricket australian batsman david
warner has been ruled out of the boxing
day test in melbourne
qriket australia says warner hasn't
recovered from a groin injury
suffered in the one day international
series against india
and we are standing by to hear from the
wa police commissioner following the
sentencing of the claremont killer
bradley edwards and we will bring that
to you let's get more on our top story
about the coronavirus cluster
in sydney's northern beaches premier
gladysburglion has announced a slight
easing of restrictions in parts of
sydney
to allow for family gatherings over
christmas
in relation to regional new south wales
there will be no
changes in relation to greater sydney
there will be no changes but for one
tweak and that is on the 24th
the 25th and the 26th you can have of
course
10 people into your home but you'll be
able to have in addition to that
children under 12. but can i stress you
cannot have different groups of 10
people during the day
it's one group of 10 and you have to
stick to that one group of 10
plus kids under 12. in relation to the
northern beaches
both the science and the health advice
tells us that there are two distinct
parts of the northern beaches and we
will be separating those okay we are
taking you live now to perth where the
wa police commissioner
is going to speak following the
sentencing of bradley edwards let's
listen in
one foot
this is a momentous day a day we've now
witnessed the jailing of an evil man
his honor justice hall has jailed
bradley edwards for a minimum
of 40 years in prison that means that mr
edwards will not be eligible for parole
until he's
88 years of age
that does not mean though that he will
be released on parole
just that he can apply for parole
edwards is a killer a sadistic rapist
who preyed on innocent women
he devastated families and tormented the
western australian community
the jailing of edwards means the
community is now safe
from this terrible person as police
commissioner
i do not usually comment on court
outcomes
but i am going to make an exception
today
it is my sincere hope for the sake of
victims
for the sake of the families and friends
and indeed for the safety of our
community
that edwards will never be released from
prison
today i also want to pay tribute to the
victims
and their families we must never forget
the innocence
that was destroyed the grief and
devastation
that was visited on parents siblings
and loved ones i want to reinforce once
again my thanks to carmel barbaguello
and her team at the dpp in their
unwavering
pursuit of justice i also add
my thanks to the over 700 individual
police officers and analysts and
forensic officers
who worked on these series of crimes
over a 30-year period together with the
scientists and the experts
who have helped gather this vital
evidence we all owe them
thanks but we must never forget
sarah jane and keira
and for the family of sarah and i've
just once again spoken to
don spears sarah's father
the quest for justice for sarah will
continue
sarah's murder remains an open case
and western australia police will never
give up
in our quest to bring justice for sarah
spears
we must also never forget that
the crimes that so terribly change the
lives
of other young women we owe a debt of
gratitude
to those victims who live to tell
their tale and who bravely testified
during the trial they are not
just victims they are survivors and i
commend them on their courage
and their perseverance throughout this
entire process
i sincerely hope that western australia
never sees
anything like these nature of crimes
ever again
and i repeat the western australian
community
will never want to see edwards ever
released from prison
i'm happy to take several questions
uh look i won't comment on appeal that
that is a mechanism
opened to edwards as it is for any
person who's been found guilty
will let that run its course
uh we will continue to investigate the
murder of sarah spears
and that will continue and yes that does
involve
uh speaking to mr edwards look i'm not
going to disclose
the nature of our investigations but i
can reassure
the community as i have with the family
that we will never stop
we have and will continue to investigate
and that does include
speaking with mysterious
[Music]
i think the community and i share that
can be satisfied that
this is the longest ever minimum
sentence for any crime ever
in western australian judicial history
the fact that edwards has been
sentenced to a minimum of 40 years
on their life sentence is the longest
ever
and i think it reflects the severity and
gravity of the crimes
[Music]
look i've spoken to each of the families
and the dpp
we believe that there has been a just
outcome delivered
in the sentence today
a lot of science was involved
on the other unsolved
well during the course of this
long-running investigation there in fact
have been
other homicides and serious crimes that
have
been able to be progressed and persons
charged as a consequence of forensic
science improving
forensic science continues to improve
and the men that stand behind me
and their colleagues are able to now use
modern science and that does assist us
so i expect that
any unsolved crimes we will continue to
use
every opportunity we've got and that
does include advanced
uh scientific forensic opportunities
in speaking to each of the families uh
immediately after sentencing
they believe a just sentence has been
delivered
and so it will never replace their loved
ones
and it will forever change the lives of
those living victims
but they believe justice has been
delivered today
court was told today that just because
there was no conviction
between 1997 and 2016 it didn't mean
that it hadn't
committed other crimes is there any
suspicion from police that might have
done it
we're chiefly interested in speaking
with mr edwards
clearly about the murder of sarah spears
that is an open statement i make but we
will never close the door
on investigating any crimes
no well thank you very much
okay a momentous day says the wa police
commissioner chris dawson there he says
the jailing of bradley edwards over the
clermont killings
is the jailing of an evil man who won't
get parole until he is 88
at the very earliest now bradley edwards
has been sentenced to at least 40 years
jail for the murder of jane rimmer in
1996 and kiera glennon
in 1997. and the commissioner says this
is the longest minimum sentence in wa's
judicial history
he says it is just but adds that west
australians will never want to see him
released
now he acknowledged that it is unusual
for him as police commissioner to
comment on court sentences but this case
warrants it
and police commissioner chris dawson
says sarah spears case
remains open for business news now
here's david chow
tesla's chief executive elon musk has
revealed that he reached out to apple
a few years ago with a deal that could
have led to apple entering the electric
car industry
this morning elon musk tweeted during
the darkest days of the model 3
program he reached out to apple's ceo
tim cook to
discuss the possibility of apple
acquiring tesla for one tenth of its
current value
and that mr cook refused to take that
meeting
right now tesla is worth 805 billion
dollars so a tenth of that would have
been 80 and a half billion
mr musk was replying to a twitter chain
citing a reuters story
about apple ramping up its project to
build a self-driving car by 2024.
apple and tim cook haven't responded to
the tesla ceo's claims
now the australian share market has
ended its day with decent gains
it managed to claw back some of those
heavy losses it suffered in the past
three days so the all lords on the asx
200 went up by two thirds of one percent
nearly every sector went up with energy
and consumer discretionary in the lead
travel stocks did well today like flight
center qantas and webjet
but gold miners like resolute and new
crest mining fell
sharply after the precious metal spot
price fell overnight
bhp shares were also down down by one
percent after a big fall in iron ore
prices but they're still close to an
eight year high meanwhile unions
representing qantas workers have filed
an application
in the high court seeking to overturn a
ruling that
employees are not able to claim some of
their leave entitlements while they're
stood down
during the pandemic in late march more
than 20 000 qanta staff were temporarily
stood down
and were denied sick carers and
compassionate leave
but they were still able to get annually
long service and job keeper payments
earlier this year the federal court
sided with qantas and said
staff were not entitled to all their
leave entitlement
because technically there was no work to
be absent from
the unions then appealed to the full
federal court and lost again last month
so this high court appeal is their last
chance to change the outcome
now the aussie dollar has risen a little
to and a half 75.5
cents but currency experts are
predicting it could rise to 80 usns by
the end of next year thanks to
strong demand for iron ore from china
and a weakening us dollar trend
now in asian markets new zealand and
shanghai are up sharply by one percent
hong kong up modestly half a percent
japan up very slightly by a third of one
percent
now u.s markets the s p 500 fell
slightly for the third day in a row
the dow lost two thirds of one percent
while the tech stocks boosted the nasdaq
by half a percent
all this despite the fact u.s congress
has passed a trillion dollar stimulus
bill which would normally boost share
prices you'd think
now the asx actually followed a strong
lead from europe for a change
germany and france made strong gains and
have recovered some of their heavy
losses from the previous day
and the price of gold fell overnight but
it's lifted
slightly to 1866 us dollars an ounce
while oil prices tumbled overnight with
west texas crude below 47 us per barrel
and that is the latest in finance news
gemma thanks david
well more now on the easing of
restrictions in new south wales with the
northern beaches set to be divided into
two zones
north and south of narrabeen bridge
northern beaches mp
jason palinski says the division is the
right move
look i i think from the very beginning
um
the lockdown on the entire northern
beaches was i think done because that's
the council area so it was done on the
basis of the local
government area but when you looked at
the data
most of the outbreak was in avalon and
obviously dissipated slightly out from
avalon but it has been very concentrated
and very contained
in avalon so it's really unfortunate for
those people in avalon and the
surrounding areas those people i guess
behind the
covert curtain for this christmas that
they won't be able to have a normal
christmas after
such an unnormal year but um this has
just been really bad timing and
the new south wales health department
has shown itself once again why it's
the world leader in this sort of
tracking and tracing and containing this
most virulent of viruses
and where do you fit in with this
temporary arrangement and has it changed
christmas for you
it has my wife's father actually
had an emergency operation a couple of
weeks ago
they leaving port macquarie we were
hoping to spend christmas with them this
year
so we have been badly impacted by um
these arrangements i'm
i'm i'm still in the northern beaches
biosphere but uh
i'm um not behind the cover curtain i'm
i'm in colorado but still we won't be
able to leave the area
um we'll be able to spend christmas with
my parents but uh she won't be able to
see her father for christmas which
is causing you know some degree of angst
yeah understandable
and um i mean you are in amongst it how
are people feeling about the cluster
situation
also the subsequent lockdown and have
you been able to gauge much of the
reaction to this reprieve
given you are in lockdown uh look um
i went out and did some shopping this
morning um by that stage we still hadn't
had the announcement
people were very hopeful um that we
would be
able to have a normal christmas or
something approximating a normal
christmas
obviously a lot of people feared that we
wouldn't be able to do that
but the sense of community on the
northern beaches from the moment this
outbreak was revealed last week
to even today has been just
extraordinary the phone calls and emails
that i've been getting from people
saying
look this you know this isn't great um
they've been using sometimes stronger
language than that
but when you compare our christmas to
that that many other people are having
in many other parts of the world
it still isn't too bad i think that sort
of level of
understanding and contextualising up
here is
what's really set the community apart
why you've seen so many people come out
and get tested
and why people have been so
understanding under very difficult
circumstances
it is a nuanced approach do you think
there will be confusion genuine
confusion also possibly willful
ignorance
and will it also be hard to go back to a
lockdown situation come the 27th
um look my hope is that the data that
we've seen over the last few days
continues that trend continues
and if that trend continues then
obviously you want to leave this with
the medical experts and
and follow the science but you would
have to say if the trend continues the
way that it is continuing
then going back into lockdown whiteness
won't necessarily be necessary
obviously we want to take a
precautionary approach but the approach
that we've taken in new south wales over
many months on this issue
has proven to be very effective i think
that the government the department of
health
um gladys barry jacolian has managed to
get the complete buy-in from the
community
and that's why we haven't had to have
owners and mandatory
requirements brought in she's been able
to rely on the cooperation
and the buy-in from the community not
just here on the northern beaches but
across sydney
and that has proven to be a far more
effective approach generally when you
look at
other parts of the world when you allow
people to buy in
and to cooperate with health authorities
that's been a far more effective
approach
what about people seeking exemptions to
this current arrangement on
compassionate grounds uh be it over this
christmas period or
or the wider lockdown where do they go
to seek out information on that
um so gemma there's um they can go to
the new south wales department of health
to both get information
and application for that the phone
number is one three hundred
two double eight triple two um there's
also an email address to attach that if
they prefer to email the department of
health
um i've i've actually sent that to you
guys because it's quite a long and
convoluted one
but that is the best way people want to
go about
seeking an exemption there are grounds
on compassionate
grounds that you can seek an exemption
to leave the northern beaches if you
need to
and i encourage anyone who's worried
about that to ring one three hundred
two double a triple two and seek more
information
and jason before we let you go um
testing rates on the northern beaches
have been phenomenal are you worried
that they're going to drop
right off over this period well you
would expect to see a drop off because i
think we're nearing
about 100 so there would be some people
going back for a second go gym or if
they stay at this rate
uh but look um that has been the one of
the major factors in us being able to
contain this virus
on the northern beaches and right across
sydney which is so many people have come
out to get tested
which has given our health authorities
the sort of data they need to make
accurate um predictions
and not only reliable ones but ones that
they can have confidence in
so i'd encourage anyone once again who
has even the mildest of symptoms
to go and get uh tested um to keep
looking at the new south wales
department of health website to see as
those venues get updated
and look my daughter and i went and got
tested yesterday
uh we were sat in line for about an hour
it seemed to go much faster than that
and it's really worth doing just even to
keep both your neighbors your community
and family and friends safe over this
christmas and new year period france is
reopening its borders to traffic from
britain after a 48-hour closure which
has left thousands of trucks stranded in
england
european citizens and residents freight
drivers and others will soon be allowed
in
provided they have a negative
coronavirus test and the restrictions
were imposed after the uk government
confirmed it was battling a new fast
spreading strain of the virus
parked nose to bumper almost 3 000
lorries stranded in kent
this is operation brock in action a way
of keeping kent's roads moving
by diverting lorries to an empty
airstrip
well this is manston airfield and as you
can see there's just been a steady
stream
of lorries coming past me since i've
been standing here and it's looking like
over there
it's already filling up some in the
industry worried that as many as six to
seven
thousand lorries were heading to dover
today along the route inn
miles from the port lorries tucked into
lay-bys or parking lots
by the side of the road we meet hamid
from turkey he showed us his bread
yogurt eggs and tea he carries with him
to keep him going
with a few words of english he told us
he's come from leeds
and got stuck here on his way home
many of the drivers here now have empty
lorries after dropping their food and
goods off for christmas
everything was okay nothing appointed
branco arrived on sunday
they're trying to get home to bosnia and
italy we were hoping to
go back to our homes uh for new year's
with our family to celebrate but now
it's
not gonna happen not this year we don't
have bathroom we don't have the
anything you know we are stuck here
maybe for days
by this evening frustrations were
starting to show with a spontaneous
protest
outside the port entrance and then a
breakthrough
any passengers going to france and at
the moment i'm afraid that's mostly
french citizens returning and one or two
other
exceptions will need a lateral flow test
or a pcr test but a test within the
72-hour period
uh before they go to france of course
anyone coming this way and again we're
not encouraging anybody to travel right
now
uh we'll need to follow our rules which
are self-isolation for 10 days
or a test to release after five days
and further news on lorry drivers from
six am
tomorrow morning the army and nhs staff
will begin the process
of testing hauliers at marston airport
they'll be using the lateral flow test
rather than the pcr test which is much
faster around
half an hour if the driver tests
negative they'll be free
to go across to france regardless of
their nationality
tonight in dover there was still anger
and confusion
this is not good that's uh animal things
and now they say that they need they
need a pcr test
how who is this is it possible you see
the cure
we have our test because we were
thinking about this when was
when we was thinking about going in
romania we have we had our tests already
but they didn't say anything about many
in the industry were hoping for a deal
but no this will be a logistical
challenge if it's the way it has to be
done we'll
have to find a way but it will be very
slow and it will have a long-term impact
on our ability to move our freshman
future food
this evening the government are asking
hauliers not to travel to kent
many will spend a third night here in
their vehicles and they're still not
certain
if they'll get back for christmas it's
time for the weather now with graham
creed and
graeme these severe thunderstorms are
active in the northern territory yeah
they are gemma and we're expecting to
see them become a little bit more
widespread through queensland over the
coming days as well this is all due to a
trough that's going to be very slow
moving across that region
we've still got a bit of tropical
moisture also pushing down into new
south wales and the trough will start to
move up the coast over the next two day
period that's also going to bring the
potential of showers and some isolated
thunderstorms
but let's head to queensland first the
next two days we'll see showers and
storms becoming widespread over the
central and southern
inland all the way through to the north
we'll also start to see those showers
and thunderstorms pushing through
towards parts of the central coast and
there could be localized heavy falls
the trough will start to move through
the south coast during thursday
on christmas day it will push into the
central and northern parts of the state
now it is going to bring some
coastal cloud and showers we're not
looking at overly widespread or heavy
falls
it could be an isolated shower south of
the ranges in victoria and this will
mostly
be likely in the morning but they'll
clear away on christmas day
where it should be clear dry and mostly
sunny for tasmania a similar scenario a
few showers are
on the way for christmas eve
particularly about the west and south
and up around the northeastern corner
they'll clear away to just partly cloudy
conditions about the far
south as we move through christmas day
south australia clear dry and sunny
quite warm across the north a little bit
milder
in the south particularly near the
coastal areas but temperatures are just
slowly starting to warm up
over the coming days and for western
australia where the heat
continues through perth and even though
we see the city temperatures dropping
back on christmas day
you don't have to go too far further
inland to see those temperatures staying
in the 40s and that'll be a similar
scenario further north of perth
now widespread showers and thunderstorms
across the northern territory
we'll see them heaviest up across the
far north and more widespread
but we could see them fairly widespread
at times through the central part
and in towards the pilbara and kimberley
now we are going to see the heaviest of
the falls up around the northern
territory and queensland particularly
along that trough through queensland
we've got the trough moving up the coast
of new south wales it stalls in the now
northeast after christmas day so that's
why we've got that cluster of storms
there
and a frontal system will bring some
more showers to the south east
thanks graeme and that is abc news for
now i'm gemma vanessa and coming up on
the abc news channel
we'll have more on our breaking news
with the claremont killer bradley robert
edwards
send us to at least 40 years in prison
stay with us
[Music]
[Applause]
whenever you want wherever you are know
the story with abc news
the most trusted news source get
breaking news updates with live
notifications
plus the latest news from australia and
around the world this will be the first
step in an ever expanding bubble go to
news.abc.net.iu or download the news app
they're swapping the classroom for the
pressure cooker there's only going to be
one winner tonight
it's not going to be like at school
where everyone gets a ribbon but will it
be tom
that's left feeling the heat probably
thinking what's smoke mean
it's pretty much the definition of utah
hard quiz kid special
tonight 7 30 on abc and iview
it's been a year like no other
unprecedented
unimaginable unfathomable there's only
one way to look back
[Applause]
tomorrow on news breakfast spend your
christmas eve with us
we'll bring you the latest coronavirus
developments from across the country
as we all prepare for a covert safe get
together and we'll look ahead to the big
boxing day movie releases see you an
hour later than usual at 7
watch abc news live stream anywhere
anytime
on abc iview keep up to date with the
latest breaking stories from around the
corner
and across the globe and you can catch
up on all your favorite abc news and
current affairs programs
head to abc iview and live stream abc
news now
this new year's eve the parties are
yours
stay home with the abc for the biggest
night of the year
at 8 30 join ro for
and at nine charlie pickering and zan
rowe bring you australia's biggest stars
there's only one place to be this new
year's eve that's your place with the
abc
from 8 30 on abc and iview
grandstand summer of cricket continues
live and ad free
as australia face off against fierce
rivals india taking the catch behind
every test all the rivalry called live
at the grounds
grandstand summer of cricket live on abc
radio and the abc listen
app know the tradition cultural bird
brings the land back to life know the
reason the most important thing to me as
a gun dungeon
person is protecting country for future
generations know the languages
reporting from our in the country lara
kia country reporting from ghana country
reporting from pinematic
from larakir country i'm on your toyota
country from
nepaluna lutrowita for abc news
know the meaning i in this country this
country is me
know the story with abc news
today the claremont killer sentenced to
a minimum of 40 years in jail for the
murder of two women in the 1990s
this is a momentous day a day we've now
witnessed the jailing of an evil man
[Music]
a temporary reprieve for sydney with
coronavirus restrictions to be eased for
christmas
investigations underway into a fatal
police shooting in western sydney
and australian batsman david warner
ruled out of the boxing day test in
melbourne
due to a groin injury
[Music]
hello and welcome to abc news i'm gemma
vanessa
bradley robert edwards has been
sentenced to at least 40 years in prison
for the murders of jane rimmer and kyra
glennon edwards was found guilty of two
of the 1990s claremont killings earlier
this year
reporter david webber joins us now from
outside the supreme court in perth
david take us through the sentence
well gemma there were seven crimes that
he was found guilty of he had pleaded
guilty to some crimes before the murder
trial began
and let me just go through them 40 years
for the murder of kyra glennon
40 years for the murder of jane rimmer
12 years 12 years
and three years in relation to uh
offenses committed in 1995 there was a
woman that was raped
uh she was abducted from near claremont
and raped in caracada cemetery
and basically left there and in 1988
there was a home invasion
sentences of four and two years but
they're to be served concurrently so
really the head sentence is 40 years
which is a very long minimum sentence
for western australia in fact justice
stephen hall said
edwards who's now 52 is likely to die in
jail
what's been the reaction the reaction
the courtroom
was quite exuberant there was a lot of
applause uh just after the sentences
were read out
it had been an emotional hearing there
had been some tears from victim impact
from victims who gave impact statements
in the court and police were very
pleased with the result
this is some of what police commissioner
chris dawson had to say
as police commissioner i do not usually
comment on court outcomes
but i am going to make an exception
today
it is my sincere hope for the sake of
victims
for the sake of the families and friends
and indeed for the safety of our
community
that edwards will never be released from
prison
david is there likely to be an appeal
there could be an appeal against the
sentence and the conviction we haven't
heard yet
uh justice stephen hall of course was
the man who sent away
anthony robert harvey for murdering his
family uh he ordered that he never be
released
today he said that he didn't think
edwards should be ordered to never be
released
but did set a non-parole period of 40
years uh which does mean that
he's likely i'm very unlikely to get out
in any case so while there was that
discussion about
you know whether he shouldn't be
released or what category the crime fell
into
perhaps that 40-year non-parole period
does prevent a successful appeal against
the sentence
but it is possible there could be uh
appeals against the sentence and the
conviction at this stage
reporter david webber outside the
supreme court in perth thank you
coronavirus restrictions will be eased
in parts of sydney tomorrow in time for
christmas
new south wales has recorded eight new
cases of covid19
seven are linked to the northern beaches
cluster there are modest changes
for greater sydney 10 adults will be
allowed to visit a home
plus children under the age of 12. the
northern beaches will be separated into
two zones with a new boundary at
narrabeen bridge
in the northern zone five people will be
allowed to visit a home they all must be
from within that region though
people in the southern zone such as
manly or dui will be allowed to have 10
people visit their homes
however local residents will not be
allowed to leave the area
reporter james carmody is at narrabeen
on the northern beaches
when they were announced i was at a
butcher's shop in belgala
and generally people there were quite
pleased with the changes that's in
the southern part of the northern
beaches so they'll be allowed 10 people
plus the kids for christmas uh we were
speaking with the butcher there and
he said people we saw people sorry
turning up
knowing how many they can cater for on
christmas day now
and christmas will look much more like
normal for them than it otherwise might
have done
there were people there though who still
have family on the northern side
of the northern beaches and they'll be
cut off from them
where i am now is at the narrabeen
bridge and
things here are a lot more complicated
because
there's really uh people live either
side of this bridge but the rules are
quite different
just a stone throw away over the water
here
we spoke with people who were doing
their shopping on this side of the
bridge on the southern side
but they live on the northern side they
won't be able to come across anymore
from the 24th through to the
uh the day after christmas and we spoke
with people who
they have mothers in uh we spoke with a
woman who has a mother in a nursing home
on
the other side of the bridge won't be
able to spend christmas with her
we spoke to a father and his young son
now the son usually spends most of the
time with his mother who lives on
the south side of narrabeen the father
lives in north narrabeen he's urgently
seeking clarification as to
whether he'll be able to see his young
son on christmas day
now the premier said that it will be
tough many of these restrictions for
some people but she said it's
what must be done right now still don't
know how the virus got into the avalon
cluster we don't know how the virus got
into the community and we want to make
sure that there aren't
strains or there aren't lines of
community transmission that we haven't
found yet
so can i please stress that for all of
greater sydney
for all of the northern part of the
northern beaches we will revert back to
existing conditions on the 27th of
december
but the jury is out for the southern
part of the northern beaches for the
precinct
uh that's not that that contentious or
that that avalon cluster
that concentration the jury's out as to
what happens on the 27th of december but
for the rest of us
we go back to what we have today and
james what do we know about the case
numbers
so after a extremely high number of
tests conducted again there was
only eight cases again today seven of
those
were linked to that avalon cluster which
now numbers 97
and the other was one that was reported
yesterday that was a health care worker
working
transporting patients queensland police
have warned travelers who attempt to
illegally enter the state from
coronavirus hot spots that they will be
caught
more than a hundred people attempting to
enter the state were turned away
yesterday
the premier anastasia palestine says
states and territories have closed their
borders
based on independent health advice it is
not just queensland
that took the tough measures of shutting
the borders with new south wales
the health advice of nearly every other
health officer across
this the country uh was advising their
respective leaders
exactly the same thing independently so
these are measures because there has
been a cluster
outbreak in the northern beaches if
there hadn't been the cluster outbreak
in the northern beaches
well no one would have had to take these
measures and everybody
would have been seeing their family and
friends over this christmas new year
period but i think it's a bit rich
for new south wales to start blaming
queensland and victoria and whichever
other state and territory
she wants to blame this has happened in
new south wales
it has happened in the northern beach